<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6-5" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
  CHAPTER V
</h2>
<p>
  Raskolnikov walked after him.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What&rsquo;s this?&rdquo; cried Svidrigaïlov turning round, &ldquo;I thought I said...&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It means that I am not going to lose sight of you now.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Both stood still and gazed at one another, as though measuring their
  strength.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;From all your half tipsy stories,&rdquo; Raskolnikov observed harshly, &ldquo;I am <i>positive</i>
  that you have not given up your designs on my sister, but are pursuing
  them more actively than ever. I have learnt that my sister received a
  letter this morning. You have hardly been able to sit still all this
  time.... You may have unearthed a wife on the way, but that means nothing.
  I should like to make certain myself.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Raskolnikov could hardly have said himself what he wanted and of what he
  wished to make certain.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Upon my word! I&rsquo;ll call the police!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Call away!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Again they stood for a minute facing each other. At last Svidrigaïlov&rsquo;s
  face changed. Having satisfied himself that Raskolnikov was not frightened
  at his threat, he assumed a mirthful and friendly air.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What a fellow! I purposely refrained from referring to your affair,
  though I am devoured by curiosity. It&rsquo;s a fantastic affair. I&rsquo;ve put it
  off till another time, but you&rsquo;re enough to rouse the dead.... Well, let
  us go, only I warn you beforehand I am only going home for a moment, to
  get some money; then I shall lock up the flat, take a cab and go to spend
  the evening at the Islands. Now, now are you going to follow me?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I&rsquo;m coming to your lodgings, not to see you but Sofya Semyonovna, to say
  I&rsquo;m sorry not to have been at the funeral.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That&rsquo;s as you like, but Sofya Semyonovna is not at home. She has taken
  the three children to an old lady of high rank, the patroness of some
  orphan asylums, whom I used to know years ago. I charmed the old lady by
  depositing a sum of money with her to provide for the three children of
  Katerina Ivanovna and subscribing to the institution as well. I told her
  too the story of Sofya Semyonovna in full detail, suppressing nothing. It
  produced an indescribable effect on her. That&rsquo;s why Sofya Semyonovna has
  been invited to call to-day at the X. Hotel where the lady is staying for
  the time.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No matter, I&rsquo;ll come all the same.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;As you like, it&rsquo;s nothing to me, but I won&rsquo;t come with you; here we are
  at home. By the way, I am convinced that you regard me with suspicion just
  because I have shown such delicacy and have not so far troubled you with
  questions... you understand? It struck you as extraordinary; I don&rsquo;t mind
  betting it&rsquo;s that. Well, it teaches one to show delicacy!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And to listen at doors!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah, that&rsquo;s it, is it?&rdquo; laughed Svidrigaïlov. &ldquo;Yes, I should have been
  surprised if you had let that pass after all that has happened. Ha-ha!
  Though I did understand something of the pranks you had been up to and
  were telling Sofya Semyonovna about, what was the meaning of it? Perhaps I
  am quite behind the times and can&rsquo;t understand. For goodness&rsquo; sake,
  explain it, my dear boy. Expound the latest theories!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You couldn&rsquo;t have heard anything. You&rsquo;re making it all up!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I&rsquo;m not talking about that (though I did hear something). No, I&rsquo;m
  talking of the way you keep sighing and groaning now. The Schiller in you
  is in revolt every moment, and now you tell me not to listen at doors. If
  that&rsquo;s how you feel, go and inform the police that you had this mischance:
  you made a little mistake in your theory. But if you are convinced that
  one mustn&rsquo;t listen at doors, but one may murder old women at one&rsquo;s
  pleasure, you&rsquo;d better be off to America and make haste. Run, young man!
  There may still be time. I&rsquo;m speaking sincerely. Haven&rsquo;t you the money?
  I&rsquo;ll give you the fare.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not thinking of that at all,&rdquo; Raskolnikov interrupted with disgust.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I understand (but don&rsquo;t put yourself out, don&rsquo;t discuss it if you don&rsquo;t
  want to). I understand the questions you are worrying over&mdash;moral
  ones, aren&rsquo;t they? Duties of citizen and man? Lay them all aside. They are
  nothing to you now, ha-ha! You&rsquo;ll say you are still a man and a citizen.
  If so you ought not to have got into this coil. It&rsquo;s no use taking up a
  job you are not fit for. Well, you&rsquo;d better shoot yourself, or don&rsquo;t you
  want to?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You seem trying to enrage me, to make me leave you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What a queer fellow! But here we are. Welcome to the staircase. You see,
  that&rsquo;s the way to Sofya Semyonovna. Look, there is no one at home. Don&rsquo;t
  you believe me? Ask Kapernaumov. She leaves the key with him. Here is
  Madame de Kapernaumov herself. Hey, what? She is rather deaf. Has she gone
  out? Where? Did you hear? She is not in and won&rsquo;t be till late in the
  evening probably. Well, come to my room; you wanted to come and see me,
  didn&rsquo;t you? Here we are. Madame Resslich&rsquo;s not at home. She is a woman who
  is always busy, an excellent woman I assure you.... She might have been of
  use to you if you had been a little more sensible. Now, see! I take this
  five-per-cent bond out of the bureau&mdash;see what a lot I&rsquo;ve got of them
  still&mdash;this one will be turned into cash to-day. I mustn&rsquo;t waste any
  more time. The bureau is locked, the flat is locked, and here we are again
  on the stairs. Shall we take a cab? I&rsquo;m going to the Islands. Would you
  like a lift? I&rsquo;ll take this carriage. Ah, you refuse? You are tired of it!
  Come for a drive! I believe it will come on to rain. Never mind, we&rsquo;ll put
  down the hood....&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Svidrigaïlov was already in the carriage. Raskolnikov decided that his
  suspicions were at least for that moment unjust. Without answering a word
  he turned and walked back towards the Hay Market. If he had only turned
  round on his way he might have seen Svidrigaïlov get out not a hundred
  paces off, dismiss the cab and walk along the pavement. But he had turned
  the corner and could see nothing. Intense disgust drew him away from
  Svidrigaïlov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;To think that I could for one instant have looked for help from that
  coarse brute, that depraved sensualist and blackguard!&rdquo; he cried.
</p>
<p>
  Raskolnikov&rsquo;s judgment was uttered too lightly and hastily: there was
  something about Svidrigaïlov which gave him a certain original, even a
  mysterious character. As concerned his sister, Raskolnikov was convinced
  that Svidrigaïlov would not leave her in peace. But it was too tiresome
  and unbearable to go on thinking and thinking about this.
</p>
<p>
  When he was alone, he had not gone twenty paces before he sank, as usual,
  into deep thought. On the bridge he stood by the railing and began gazing
  at the water. And his sister was standing close by him.
</p>
<p>
  He met her at the entrance to the bridge, but passed by without seeing
  her. Dounia had never met him like this in the street before and was
  struck with dismay. She stood still and did not know whether to call to
  him or not. Suddenly she saw Svidrigaïlov coming quickly from the
  direction of the Hay Market.
</p>
<p>
  He seemed to be approaching cautiously. He did not go on to the bridge,
  but stood aside on the pavement, doing all he could to avoid Raskolnikov&rsquo;s
  seeing him. He had observed Dounia for some time and had been making signs
  to her. She fancied he was signalling to beg her not to speak to her
  brother, but to come to him.
</p>
<p>
  That was what Dounia did. She stole by her brother and went up to
  Svidrigaïlov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Let us make haste away,&rdquo; Svidrigaïlov whispered to her, &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want
  Rodion Romanovitch to know of our meeting. I must tell you I&rsquo;ve been
  sitting with him in the restaurant close by, where he looked me up and I
  had great difficulty in getting rid of him. He has somehow heard of my
  letter to you and suspects something. It wasn&rsquo;t you who told him, of
  course, but if not you, who then?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, we&rsquo;ve turned the corner now,&rdquo; Dounia interrupted, &ldquo;and my brother
  won&rsquo;t see us. I have to tell you that I am going no further with you.
  Speak to me here. You can tell it all in the street.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;In the first place, I can&rsquo;t say it in the street; secondly, you must hear
  Sofya Semyonovna too; and, thirdly, I will show you some papers.... Oh
  well, if you won&rsquo;t agree to come with me, I shall refuse to give any
  explanation and go away at once. But I beg you not to forget that a very
  curious secret of your beloved brother&rsquo;s is entirely in my keeping.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Dounia stood still, hesitating, and looked at Svidrigaïlov with searching
  eyes.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What are you afraid of?&rdquo; he observed quietly. &ldquo;The town is not the
  country. And even in the country you did me more harm than I did you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Have you prepared Sofya Semyonovna?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, I have not said a word to her and am not quite certain whether she is
  at home now. But most likely she is. She has buried her stepmother to-day:
  she is not likely to go visiting on such a day. For the time I don&rsquo;t want
  to speak to anyone about it and I half regret having spoken to you. The
  slightest indiscretion is as bad as betrayal in a thing like this. I live
  there in that house, we are coming to it. That&rsquo;s the porter of our house&mdash;he
  knows me very well; you see, he&rsquo;s bowing; he sees I&rsquo;m coming with a lady
  and no doubt he has noticed your face already and you will be glad of that
  if you are afraid of me and suspicious. Excuse my putting things so
  coarsely. I haven&rsquo;t a flat to myself; Sofya Semyonovna&rsquo;s room is next to
  mine&mdash;she lodges in the next flat. The whole floor is let out in
  lodgings. Why are you frightened like a child? Am I really so terrible?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Svidrigaïlov&rsquo;s lips were twisted in a condescending smile; but he was in
  no smiling mood. His heart was throbbing and he could scarcely breathe. He
  spoke rather loud to cover his growing excitement. But Dounia did not
  notice this peculiar excitement, she was so irritated by his remark that
  she was frightened of him like a child and that he was so terrible to her.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Though I know that you are not a man... of honour, I am not in the least
  afraid of you. Lead the way,&rdquo; she said with apparent composure, but her
  face was very pale.
</p>
<p>
  Svidrigaïlov stopped at Sonia&rsquo;s room.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Allow me to inquire whether she is at home.... She is not. How
  unfortunate! But I know she may come quite soon. If she&rsquo;s gone out, it can
  only be to see a lady about the orphans. Their mother is dead.... I&rsquo;ve
  been meddling and making arrangements for them. If Sofya Semyonovna does
  not come back in ten minutes, I will send her to you, to-day if you like.
  This is my flat. These are my two rooms. Madame Resslich, my landlady, has
  the next room. Now, look this way. I will show you my chief piece of
  evidence: this door from my bedroom leads into two perfectly empty rooms,
  which are to let. Here they are... You must look into them with some
  attention.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Svidrigaïlov occupied two fairly large furnished rooms. Dounia was looking
  about her mistrustfully, but saw nothing special in the furniture or
  position of the rooms. Yet there was something to observe, for instance,
  that Svidrigaïlov&rsquo;s flat was exactly between two sets of almost
  uninhabited apartments. His rooms were not entered directly from the
  passage, but through the landlady&rsquo;s two almost empty rooms. Unlocking a
  door leading out of his bedroom, Svidrigaïlov showed Dounia the two empty
  rooms that were to let. Dounia stopped in the doorway, not knowing what
  she was called to look upon, but Svidrigaïlov hastened to explain.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Look here, at this second large room. Notice that door, it&rsquo;s locked. By
  the door stands a chair, the only one in the two rooms. I brought it from
  my rooms so as to listen more conveniently. Just the other side of the
  door is Sofya Semyonovna&rsquo;s table; she sat there talking to Rodion
  Romanovitch. And I sat here listening on two successive evenings, for two
  hours each time&mdash;and of course I was able to learn something, what do
  you think?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You listened?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, I did. Now come back to my room; we can&rsquo;t sit down here.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He brought Avdotya Romanovna back into his sitting-room and offered her a
  chair. He sat down at the opposite side of the table, at least seven feet
  from her, but probably there was the same glow in his eyes which had once
  frightened Dounia so much. She shuddered and once more looked about her
  distrustfully. It was an involuntary gesture; she evidently did not wish
  to betray her uneasiness. But the secluded position of Svidrigaïlov&rsquo;s
  lodging had suddenly struck her. She wanted to ask whether his landlady at
  least were at home, but pride kept her from asking. Moreover, she had
  another trouble in her heart incomparably greater than fear for herself.
  She was in great distress.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Here is your letter,&rdquo; she said, laying it on the table. &ldquo;Can it be true
  what you write? You hint at a crime committed, you say, by my brother. You
  hint at it too clearly; you daren&rsquo;t deny it now. I must tell you that I&rsquo;d
  heard of this stupid story before you wrote and don&rsquo;t believe a word of
  it. It&rsquo;s a disgusting and ridiculous suspicion. I know the story and why
  and how it was invented. You can have no proofs. You promised to prove it.
  Speak! But let me warn you that I don&rsquo;t believe you! I don&rsquo;t believe you!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Dounia said this, speaking hurriedly, and for an instant the colour rushed
  to her face.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;If you didn&rsquo;t believe it, how could you risk coming alone to my rooms?
  Why have you come? Simply from curiosity?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t torment me. Speak, speak!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;There&rsquo;s no denying that you are a brave girl. Upon my word, I thought you
  would have asked Mr. Razumihin to escort you here. But he was not with you
  nor anywhere near. I was on the look-out. It&rsquo;s spirited of you, it proves
  you wanted to spare Rodion Romanovitch. But everything is divine in
  you.... About your brother, what am I to say to you? You&rsquo;ve just seen him
  yourself. What did you think of him?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Surely that&rsquo;s not the only thing you are building on?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, not on that, but on his own words. He came here on two successive
  evenings to see Sofya Semyonovna. I&rsquo;ve shown you where they sat. He made a
  full confession to her. He is a murderer. He killed an old woman, a
  pawnbroker, with whom he had pawned things himself. He killed her sister
  too, a pedlar woman called Lizaveta, who happened to come in while he was
  murdering her sister. He killed them with an axe he brought with him. He
  murdered them to rob them and he did rob them. He took money and various
  things.... He told all this, word for word, to Sofya Semyonovna, the only
  person who knows his secret. But she has had no share by word or deed in
  the murder; she was as horrified at it as you are now. Don&rsquo;t be anxious,
  she won&rsquo;t betray him.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It cannot be,&rdquo; muttered Dounia, with white lips. She gasped for breath.
  &ldquo;It cannot be. There was not the slightest cause, no sort of ground....
  It&rsquo;s a lie, a lie!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;He robbed her, that was the cause, he took money and things. It&rsquo;s true
  that by his own admission he made no use of the money or things, but hid
  them under a stone, where they are now. But that was because he dared not
  make use of them.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But how could he steal, rob? How could he dream of it?&rdquo; cried Dounia, and
  she jumped up from the chair. &ldquo;Why, you know him, and you&rsquo;ve seen him, can
  he be a thief?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  She seemed to be imploring Svidrigaïlov; she had entirely forgotten her
  fear.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;There are thousands and millions of combinations and possibilities,
  Avdotya Romanovna. A thief steals and knows he is a scoundrel, but I&rsquo;ve
  heard of a gentleman who broke open the mail. Who knows, very likely he
  thought he was doing a gentlemanly thing! Of course I should not have
  believed it myself if I&rsquo;d been told of it as you have, but I believe my
  own ears. He explained all the causes of it to Sofya Semyonovna too, but
  she did not believe her ears at first, yet she believed her own eyes at
  last.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What... were the causes?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a long story, Avdotya Romanovna. Here&rsquo;s... how shall I tell you?&mdash;A
  theory of a sort, the same one by which I for instance consider that a
  single misdeed is permissible if the principal aim is right, a solitary
  wrongdoing and hundreds of good deeds! It&rsquo;s galling too, of course, for a
  young man of gifts and overweening pride to know that if he had, for
  instance, a paltry three thousand, his whole career, his whole future
  would be differently shaped and yet not to have that three thousand. Add
  to that, nervous irritability from hunger, from lodging in a hole, from
  rags, from a vivid sense of the charm of his social position and his
  sister&rsquo;s and mother&rsquo;s position too. Above all, vanity, pride and vanity,
  though goodness knows he may have good qualities too.... I am not blaming
  him, please don&rsquo;t think it; besides, it&rsquo;s not my business. A special
  little theory came in too&mdash;a theory of a sort&mdash;dividing mankind,
  you see, into material and superior persons, that is persons to whom the
  law does not apply owing to their superiority, who make laws for the rest
  of mankind, the material, that is. It&rsquo;s all right as a theory, <i>une
  théorie comme une autre</i>. Napoleon attracted him tremendously, that is,
  what affected him was that a great many men of genius have not hesitated
  at wrongdoing, but have overstepped the law without thinking about it. He
  seems to have fancied that he was a genius too&mdash;that is, he was
  convinced of it for a time. He has suffered a great deal and is still
  suffering from the idea that he could make a theory, but was incapable of
  boldly overstepping the law, and so he is not a man of genius. And that&rsquo;s
  humiliating for a young man of any pride, in our day especially....&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But remorse? You deny him any moral feeling then? Is he like that?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah, Avdotya Romanovna, everything is in a muddle now; not that it was
  ever in very good order. Russians in general are broad in their ideas,
  Avdotya Romanovna, broad like their land and exceedingly disposed to the
  fantastic, the chaotic. But it&rsquo;s a misfortune to be broad without a
  special genius. Do you remember what a lot of talk we had together on this
  subject, sitting in the evenings on the terrace after supper? Why, you
  used to reproach me with breadth! Who knows, perhaps we were talking at
  the very time when he was lying here thinking over his plan. There are no
  sacred traditions amongst us, especially in the educated class, Avdotya
  Romanovna. At the best someone will make them up somehow for himself out
  of books or from some old chronicle. But those are for the most part the
  learned and all old fogeys, so that it would be almost ill-bred in a man
  of society. You know my opinions in general, though. I never blame anyone.
  I do nothing at all, I persevere in that. But we&rsquo;ve talked of this more
  than once before. I was so happy indeed as to interest you in my
  opinions.... You are very pale, Avdotya Romanovna.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I know his theory. I read that article of his about men to whom all is
  permitted. Razumihin brought it to me.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Mr. Razumihin? Your brother&rsquo;s article? In a magazine? Is there such an
  article? I didn&rsquo;t know. It must be interesting. But where are you going,
  Avdotya Romanovna?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I want to see Sofya Semyonovna,&rdquo; Dounia articulated faintly. &ldquo;How do I go
  to her? She has come in, perhaps. I must see her at once. Perhaps she...&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Avdotya Romanovna could not finish. Her breath literally failed her.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Sofya Semyonovna will not be back till night, at least I believe not. She
  was to have been back at once, but if not, then she will not be in till
  quite late.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah, then you are lying! I see... you were lying... lying all the time....
  I don&rsquo;t believe you! I don&rsquo;t believe you!&rdquo; cried Dounia, completely losing
  her head.
</p>
<p>
  Almost fainting, she sank on to a chair which Svidrigaïlov made haste to
  give her.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Avdotya Romanovna, what is it? Control yourself! Here is some water.
  Drink a little....&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He sprinkled some water over her. Dounia shuddered and came to herself.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It has acted violently,&rdquo; Svidrigaïlov muttered to himself, frowning.
  &ldquo;Avdotya Romanovna, calm yourself! Believe me, he has friends. We will
  save him. Would you like me to take him abroad? I have money, I can get a
  ticket in three days. And as for the murder, he will do all sorts of good
  deeds yet, to atone for it. Calm yourself. He may become a great man yet.
  Well, how are you? How do you feel?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Cruel man! To be able to jeer at it! Let me go...&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Where are you going?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;To him. Where is he? Do you know? Why is this door locked? We came in at
  that door and now it is locked. When did you manage to lock it?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;We couldn&rsquo;t be shouting all over the flat on such a subject. I am far
  from jeering; it&rsquo;s simply that I&rsquo;m sick of talking like this. But how can
  you go in such a state? Do you want to betray him? You will drive him to
  fury, and he will give himself up. Let me tell you, he is already being
  watched; they are already on his track. You will simply be giving him
  away. Wait a little: I saw him and was talking to him just now. He can
  still be saved. Wait a bit, sit down; let us think it over together. I
  asked you to come in order to discuss it alone with you and to consider it
  thoroughly. But do sit down!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How can you save him? Can he really be saved?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Dounia sat down. Svidrigaïlov sat down beside her.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It all depends on you, on you, on you alone,&rdquo; he began with glowing eyes,
  almost in a whisper and hardly able to utter the words for emotion.
</p>
<p>
  Dounia drew back from him in alarm. He too was trembling all over.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You... one word from you, and he is saved. I... I&rsquo;ll save him. I have
  money and friends. I&rsquo;ll send him away at once. I&rsquo;ll get a passport, two
  passports, one for him and one for me. I have friends... capable
  people.... If you like, I&rsquo;ll take a passport for you... for your
  mother.... What do you want with Razumihin? I love you too.... I love you
  beyond everything.... Let me kiss the hem of your dress, let me, let
  me.... The very rustle of it is too much for me. Tell me, &lsquo;do that,&rsquo; and
  I&rsquo;ll do it. I&rsquo;ll do everything. I will do the impossible. What you
  believe, I will believe. I&rsquo;ll do anything&mdash;anything! Don&rsquo;t, don&rsquo;t
  look at me like that. Do you know that you are killing me?...&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He was almost beginning to rave.... Something seemed suddenly to go to his
  head. Dounia jumped up and rushed to the door.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Open it! Open it!&rdquo; she called, shaking the door. &ldquo;Open it! Is there no
  one there?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Svidrigaïlov got up and came to himself. His still trembling lips slowly
  broke into an angry mocking smile.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;There is no one at home,&rdquo; he said quietly and emphatically. &ldquo;The landlady
  has gone out, and it&rsquo;s waste of time to shout like that. You are only
  exciting yourself uselessly.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Where is the key? Open the door at once, at once, base man!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I have lost the key and cannot find it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;This is an outrage,&rdquo; cried Dounia, turning pale as death. She rushed to
  the furthest corner, where she made haste to barricade herself with a
  little table.
</p>
<p>
  She did not scream, but she fixed her eyes on her tormentor and watched
  every movement he made.
</p>
<p>
  Svidrigaïlov remained standing at the other end of the room facing her. He
  was positively composed, at least in appearance, but his face was pale as
  before. The mocking smile did not leave his face.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You spoke of outrage just now, Avdotya Romanovna. In that case you may be
  sure I&rsquo;ve taken measures. Sofya Semyonovna is not at home. The
  Kapernaumovs are far away&mdash;there are five locked rooms between. I am
  at least twice as strong as you are and I have nothing to fear, besides.
  For you could not complain afterwards. You surely would not be willing
  actually to betray your brother? Besides, no one would believe you. How
  should a girl have come alone to visit a solitary man in his lodgings? So
  that even if you do sacrifice your brother, you could prove nothing. It is
  very difficult to prove an assault, Avdotya Romanovna.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Scoundrel!&rdquo; whispered Dounia indignantly.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;As you like, but observe I was only speaking by way of a general
  proposition. It&rsquo;s my personal conviction that you are perfectly right&mdash;violence
  is hateful. I only spoke to show you that you need have no remorse even
  if... you were willing to save your brother of your own accord, as I
  suggest to you. You would be simply submitting to circumstances, to
  violence, in fact, if we must use that word. Think about it. Your
  brother&rsquo;s and your mother&rsquo;s fate are in your hands. I will be your
  slave... all my life... I will wait here.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Svidrigaïlov sat down on the sofa about eight steps from Dounia. She had
  not the slightest doubt now of his unbending determination. Besides, she
  knew him. Suddenly she pulled out of her pocket a revolver, cocked it and
  laid it in her hand on the table. Svidrigaïlov jumped up.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Aha! So that&rsquo;s it, is it?&rdquo; he cried, surprised but smiling maliciously.
  &ldquo;Well, that completely alters the aspect of affairs. You&rsquo;ve made things
  wonderfully easier for me, Avdotya Romanovna. But where did you get the
  revolver? Was it Mr. Razumihin? Why, it&rsquo;s my revolver, an old friend! And
  how I&rsquo;ve hunted for it! The shooting lessons I&rsquo;ve given you in the country
  have not been thrown away.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not your revolver, it belonged to Marfa Petrovna, whom you killed,
  wretch! There was nothing of yours in her house. I took it when I began to
  suspect what you were capable of. If you dare to advance one step, I swear
  I&rsquo;ll kill you.&rdquo; She was frantic.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But your brother? I ask from curiosity,&rdquo; said Svidrigaïlov, still
  standing where he was.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Inform, if you want to! Don&rsquo;t stir! Don&rsquo;t come nearer! I&rsquo;ll shoot! You
  poisoned your wife, I know; you are a murderer yourself!&rdquo; She held the
  revolver ready.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Are you so positive I poisoned Marfa Petrovna?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You did! You hinted it yourself; you talked to me of poison.... I know
  you went to get it... you had it in readiness.... It was your doing.... It
  must have been your doing.... Scoundrel!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Even if that were true, it would have been for your sake... you would
  have been the cause.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You are lying! I hated you always, always....&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Oho, Avdotya Romanovna! You seem to have forgotten how you softened to me
  in the heat of propaganda. I saw it in your eyes. Do you remember that
  moonlight night, when the nightingale was singing?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That&rsquo;s a lie,&rdquo; there was a flash of fury in Dounia&rsquo;s eyes, &ldquo;that&rsquo;s a lie
  and a libel!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A lie? Well, if you like, it&rsquo;s a lie. I made it up. Women ought not to be
  reminded of such things,&rdquo; he smiled. &ldquo;I know you will shoot, you pretty
  wild creature. Well, shoot away!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Dounia raised the revolver, and deadly pale, gazed at him, measuring the
  distance and awaiting the first movement on his part. Her lower lip was
  white and quivering and her big black eyes flashed like fire. He had never
  seen her so handsome. The fire glowing in her eyes at the moment she
  raised the revolver seemed to kindle him and there was a pang of anguish
  in his heart. He took a step forward and a shot rang out. The bullet
  grazed his hair and flew into the wall behind. He stood still and laughed
  softly.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;The wasp has stung me. She aimed straight at my head. What&rsquo;s this?
  Blood?&rdquo; he pulled out his handkerchief to wipe the blood, which flowed in
  a thin stream down his right temple. The bullet seemed to have just grazed
  the skin.
</p>
<p>
  Dounia lowered the revolver and looked at Svidrigaïlov not so much in
  terror as in a sort of wild amazement. She seemed not to understand what
  she was doing and what was going on.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, you missed! Fire again, I&rsquo;ll wait,&rdquo; said Svidrigaïlov softly, still
  smiling, but gloomily. &ldquo;If you go on like that, I shall have time to seize
  you before you cock again.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Dounia started, quickly cocked the pistol and again raised it.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Let me be,&rdquo; she cried in despair. &ldquo;I swear I&rsquo;ll shoot again. I... I&rsquo;ll
  kill you.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well... at three paces you can hardly help it. But if you don&rsquo;t... then.&rdquo;
   His eyes flashed and he took two steps forward. Dounia shot again: it
  missed fire.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You haven&rsquo;t loaded it properly. Never mind, you have another charge
  there. Get it ready, I&rsquo;ll wait.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He stood facing her, two paces away, waiting and gazing at her with wild
  determination, with feverishly passionate, stubborn, set eyes. Dounia saw
  that he would sooner die than let her go. &ldquo;And... now, of course she would
  kill him, at two paces!&rdquo; Suddenly she flung away the revolver.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;She&rsquo;s dropped it!&rdquo; said Svidrigaïlov with surprise, and he drew a deep
  breath. A weight seemed to have rolled from his heart&mdash;perhaps not
  only the fear of death; indeed he may scarcely have felt it at that
  moment. It was the deliverance from another feeling, darker and more
  bitter, which he could not himself have defined.
</p>
<p>
  He went to Dounia and gently put his arm round her waist. She did not
  resist, but, trembling like a leaf, looked at him with suppliant eyes. He
  tried to say something, but his lips moved without being able to utter a
  sound.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Let me go,&rdquo; Dounia implored. Svidrigaïlov shuddered. Her voice now was
  quite different.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Then you don&rsquo;t love me?&rdquo; he asked softly. Dounia shook her head.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And... and you can&rsquo;t? Never?&rdquo; he whispered in despair.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Never!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  There followed a moment of terrible, dumb struggle in the heart of
  Svidrigaïlov. He looked at her with an indescribable gaze. Suddenly he
  withdrew his arm, turned quickly to the window and stood facing it.
  Another moment passed.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s the key.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He took it out of the left pocket of his coat and laid it on the table
  behind him, without turning or looking at Dounia.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Take it! Make haste!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He looked stubbornly out of the window. Dounia went up to the table to
  take the key.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Make haste! Make haste!&rdquo; repeated Svidrigaïlov, still without turning or
  moving. But there seemed a terrible significance in the tone of that &ldquo;make
  haste.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Dounia understood it, snatched up the key, flew to the door, unlocked it
  quickly and rushed out of the room. A minute later, beside herself, she
  ran out on to the canal bank in the direction of X. Bridge.
</p>
<p>
  Svidrigaïlov remained three minutes standing at the window. At last he
  slowly turned, looked about him and passed his hand over his forehead. A
  strange smile contorted his face, a pitiful, sad, weak smile, a smile of
  despair. The blood, which was already getting dry, smeared his hand. He
  looked angrily at it, then wetted a towel and washed his temple. The
  revolver which Dounia had flung away lay near the door and suddenly caught
  his eye. He picked it up and examined it. It was a little pocket
  three-barrel revolver of old-fashioned construction. There were still two
  charges and one capsule left in it. It could be fired again. He thought a
  little, put the revolver in his pocket, took his hat and went out.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2HCH0037" id="link2HCH0037">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
