<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
  CHAPTER III
</h2>
<p>
  He was not completely unconscious, however, all the time he was ill; he
  was in a feverish state, sometimes delirious, sometimes half conscious. He
  remembered a great deal afterwards. Sometimes it seemed as though there
  were a number of people round him; they wanted to take him away somewhere,
  there was a great deal of squabbling and discussing about him. Then he
  would be alone in the room; they had all gone away afraid of him, and only
  now and then opened the door a crack to look at him; they threatened him,
  plotted something together, laughed, and mocked at him. He remembered
  Nastasya often at his bedside; he distinguished another person, too, whom
  he seemed to know very well, though he could not remember who he was, and
  this fretted him, even made him cry. Sometimes he fancied he had been
  lying there a month; at other times it all seemed part of the same day.
  But of <i>that</i>&mdash;of <i>that</i> he had no recollection, and yet
  every minute he felt that he had forgotten something he ought to remember.
  He worried and tormented himself trying to remember, moaned, flew into a
  rage, or sank into awful, intolerable terror. Then he struggled to get up,
  would have run away, but someone always prevented him by force, and he
  sank back into impotence and forgetfulness. At last he returned to
  complete consciousness.
</p>
<p>
  It happened at ten o&rsquo;clock in the morning. On fine days the sun shone into
  the room at that hour, throwing a streak of light on the right wall and
  the corner near the door. Nastasya was standing beside him with another
  person, a complete stranger, who was looking at him very inquisitively. He
  was a young man with a beard, wearing a full, short-waisted coat, and
  looked like a messenger. The landlady was peeping in at the half-opened
  door. Raskolnikov sat up.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Who is this, Nastasya?&rdquo; he asked, pointing to the young man.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I say, he&rsquo;s himself again!&rdquo; she said.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;He is himself,&rdquo; echoed the man.
</p>
<p>
  Concluding that he had returned to his senses, the landlady closed the
  door and disappeared. She was always shy and dreaded conversations or
  discussions. She was a woman of forty, not at all bad-looking, fat and
  buxom, with black eyes and eyebrows, good-natured from fatness and
  laziness, and absurdly bashful.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Who... are you?&rdquo; he went on, addressing the man. But at that moment the
  door was flung open, and, stooping a little, as he was so tall, Razumihin
  came in.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What a cabin it is!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;I am always knocking my head. You call
  this a lodging! So you are conscious, brother? I&rsquo;ve just heard the news
  from Pashenka.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;He has just come to,&rdquo; said Nastasya.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Just come to,&rdquo; echoed the man again, with a smile.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And who are you?&rdquo; Razumihin asked, suddenly addressing him. &ldquo;My name is
  Vrazumihin, at your service; not Razumihin, as I am always called, but
  Vrazumihin, a student and gentleman; and he is my friend. And who are
  you?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I am the messenger from our office, from the merchant Shelopaev, and I&rsquo;ve
  come on business.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Please sit down.&rdquo; Razumihin seated himself on the other side of the
  table. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a good thing you&rsquo;ve come to, brother,&rdquo; he went on to
  Raskolnikov. &ldquo;For the last four days you have scarcely eaten or drunk
  anything. We had to give you tea in spoonfuls. I brought Zossimov to see
  you twice. You remember Zossimov? He examined you carefully and said at
  once it was nothing serious&mdash;something seemed to have gone to your
  head. Some nervous nonsense, the result of bad feeding, he says you have
  not had enough beer and radish, but it&rsquo;s nothing much, it will pass and
  you will be all right. Zossimov is a first-rate fellow! He is making quite
  a name. Come, I won&rsquo;t keep you,&rdquo; he said, addressing the man again. &ldquo;Will
  you explain what you want? You must know, Rodya, this is the second time
  they have sent from the office; but it was another man last time, and I
  talked to him. Who was it came before?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That was the day before yesterday, I venture to say, if you please, sir.
  That was Alexey Semyonovitch; he is in our office, too.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;He was more intelligent than you, don&rsquo;t you think so?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, indeed, sir, he is of more weight than I am.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Quite so; go on.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;At your mamma&rsquo;s request, through Afanasy Ivanovitch Vahrushin, of whom I
  presume you have heard more than once, a remittance is sent to you from
  our office,&rdquo; the man began, addressing Raskolnikov. &ldquo;If you are in an
  intelligible condition, I&rsquo;ve thirty-five roubles to remit to you, as
  Semyon Semyonovitch has received from Afanasy Ivanovitch at your mamma&rsquo;s
  request instructions to that effect, as on previous occasions. Do you know
  him, sir?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, I remember... Vahrushin,&rdquo; Raskolnikov said dreamily.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You hear, he knows Vahrushin,&rdquo; cried Razumihin. &ldquo;He is in &lsquo;an
  intelligible condition&rsquo;! And I see you are an intelligent man too. Well,
  it&rsquo;s always pleasant to hear words of wisdom.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That&rsquo;s the gentleman, Vahrushin, Afanasy Ivanovitch. And at the request
  of your mamma, who has sent you a remittance once before in the same
  manner through him, he did not refuse this time also, and sent
  instructions to Semyon Semyonovitch some days since to hand you
  thirty-five roubles in the hope of better to come.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That &lsquo;hoping for better to come&rsquo; is the best thing you&rsquo;ve said, though
  &lsquo;your mamma&rsquo; is not bad either. Come then, what do you say? Is he fully
  conscious, eh?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;That&rsquo;s all right. If only he can sign this little paper.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;He can scrawl his name. Have you got the book?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, here&rsquo;s the book.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Give it to me. Here, Rodya, sit up. I&rsquo;ll hold you. Take the pen and
  scribble &lsquo;Raskolnikov&rsquo; for him. For just now, brother, money is sweeter to
  us than treacle.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want it,&rdquo; said Raskolnikov, pushing away the pen.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Not want it?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I won&rsquo;t sign it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How the devil can you do without signing it?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want... the money.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t want the money! Come, brother, that&rsquo;s nonsense, I bear witness.
  Don&rsquo;t trouble, please, it&rsquo;s only that he is on his travels again. But
  that&rsquo;s pretty common with him at all times though.... You are a man of
  judgment and we will take him in hand, that is, more simply, take his hand
  and he will sign it. Here.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But I can come another time.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, no. Why should we trouble you? You are a man of judgment.... Now,
  Rodya, don&rsquo;t keep your visitor, you see he is waiting,&rdquo; and he made ready
  to hold Raskolnikov&rsquo;s hand in earnest.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Stop, I&rsquo;ll do it alone,&rdquo; said the latter, taking the pen and signing his
  name.
</p>
<p>
  The messenger took out the money and went away.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Bravo! And now, brother, are you hungry?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; answered Raskolnikov.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Is there any soup?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Some of yesterday&rsquo;s,&rdquo; answered Nastasya, who was still standing there.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;With potatoes and rice in it?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I know it by heart. Bring soup and give us some tea.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Very well.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Raskolnikov looked at all this with profound astonishment and a dull,
  unreasoning terror. He made up his mind to keep quiet and see what would
  happen. &ldquo;I believe I am not wandering. I believe it&rsquo;s reality,&rdquo; he
  thought.
</p>
<p>
  In a couple of minutes Nastasya returned with the soup, and announced that
  the tea would be ready directly. With the soup she brought two spoons, two
  plates, salt, pepper, mustard for the beef, and so on. The table was set
  as it had not been for a long time. The cloth was clean.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It would not be amiss, Nastasya, if Praskovya Pavlovna were to send us up
  a couple of bottles of beer. We could empty them.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Well, you are a cool hand,&rdquo; muttered Nastasya, and she departed to carry
  out his orders.
</p>
<p>
  Raskolnikov still gazed wildly with strained attention. Meanwhile
  Razumihin sat down on the sofa beside him, as clumsily as a bear put his
  left arm round Raskolnikov&rsquo;s head, although he was able to sit up, and
  with his right hand gave him a spoonful of soup, blowing on it that it
  might not burn him. But the soup was only just warm. Raskolnikov swallowed
  one spoonful greedily, then a second, then a third. But after giving him a
  few more spoonfuls of soup, Razumihin suddenly stopped, and said that he
  must ask Zossimov whether he ought to have more.
</p>
<p>
  Nastasya came in with two bottles of beer.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And will you have tea?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Cut along, Nastasya, and bring some tea, for tea we may venture on
  without the faculty. But here is the beer!&rdquo; He moved back to his chair,
  pulled the soup and meat in front of him, and began eating as though he
  had not touched food for three days.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I must tell you, Rodya, I dine like this here every day now,&rdquo; he mumbled
  with his mouth full of beef, &ldquo;and it&rsquo;s all Pashenka, your dear little
  landlady, who sees to that; she loves to do anything for me. I don&rsquo;t ask
  for it, but, of course, I don&rsquo;t object. And here&rsquo;s Nastasya with the tea.
  She is a quick girl. Nastasya, my dear, won&rsquo;t you have some beer?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Get along with your nonsense!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A cup of tea, then?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;A cup of tea, maybe.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Pour it out. Stay, I&rsquo;ll pour it out myself. Sit down.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He poured out two cups, left his dinner, and sat on the sofa again. As
  before, he put his left arm round the sick man&rsquo;s head, raised him up and
  gave him tea in spoonfuls, again blowing each spoonful steadily and
  earnestly, as though this process was the principal and most effective
  means towards his friend&rsquo;s recovery. Raskolnikov said nothing and made no
  resistance, though he felt quite strong enough to sit up on the sofa
  without support and could not merely have held a cup or a spoon, but even
  perhaps could have walked about. But from some queer, almost animal,
  cunning he conceived the idea of hiding his strength and lying low for a
  time, pretending if necessary not to be yet in full possession of his
  faculties, and meanwhile listening to find out what was going on. Yet he
  could not overcome his sense of repugnance. After sipping a dozen
  spoonfuls of tea, he suddenly released his head, pushed the spoon away
  capriciously, and sank back on the pillow. There were actually real
  pillows under his head now, down pillows in clean cases, he observed that,
  too, and took note of it.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Pashenka must give us some raspberry jam to-day to make him some
  raspberry tea,&rdquo; said Razumihin, going back to his chair and attacking his
  soup and beer again.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And where is she to get raspberries for you?&rdquo; asked Nastasya, balancing a
  saucer on her five outspread fingers and sipping tea through a lump of
  sugar.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;She&rsquo;ll get it at the shop, my dear. You see, Rodya, all sorts of things
  have been happening while you have been laid up. When you decamped in that
  rascally way without leaving your address, I felt so angry that I resolved
  to find you out and punish you. I set to work that very day. How I ran
  about making inquiries for you! This lodging of yours I had forgotten,
  though I never remembered it, indeed, because I did not know it; and as
  for your old lodgings, I could only remember it was at the Five Corners,
  Harlamov&rsquo;s house. I kept trying to find that Harlamov&rsquo;s house, and
  afterwards it turned out that it was not Harlamov&rsquo;s, but Buch&rsquo;s. How one
  muddles up sound sometimes! So I lost my temper, and I went on the chance
  to the address bureau next day, and only fancy, in two minutes they looked
  you up! Your name is down there.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;My name!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I should think so; and yet a General Kobelev they could not find while I
  was there. Well, it&rsquo;s a long story. But as soon as I did land on this
  place, I soon got to know all your affairs&mdash;all, all, brother, I know
  everything; Nastasya here will tell you. I made the acquaintance of
  Nikodim Fomitch and Ilya Petrovitch, and the house-porter and Mr. Zametov,
  Alexandr Grigorievitch, the head clerk in the police office, and, last,
  but not least, of Pashenka; Nastasya here knows....&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;He&rsquo;s got round her,&rdquo; Nastasya murmured, smiling slyly.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why don&rsquo;t you put the sugar in your tea, Nastasya Nikiforovna?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;You are a one!&rdquo; Nastasya cried suddenly, going off into a giggle. &ldquo;I am
  not Nikiforovna, but Petrovna,&rdquo; she added suddenly, recovering from her
  mirth.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll make a note of it. Well, brother, to make a long story short, I was
  going in for a regular explosion here to uproot all malignant influences
  in the locality, but Pashenka won the day. I had not expected, brother, to
  find her so... prepossessing. Eh, what do you think?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Raskolnikov did not speak, but he still kept his eyes fixed upon him, full
  of alarm.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And all that could be wished, indeed, in every respect,&rdquo; Razumihin went
  on, not at all embarrassed by his silence.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah, the sly dog!&rdquo; Nastasya shrieked again. This conversation afforded her
  unspeakable delight.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a pity, brother, that you did not set to work in the right way at
  first. You ought to have approached her differently. She is, so to speak,
  a most unaccountable character. But we will talk about her character
  later.... How could you let things come to such a pass that she gave up
  sending you your dinner? And that I O U? You must have been mad to sign an
  I O U. And that promise of marriage when her daughter, Natalya Yegorovna,
  was alive?... I know all about it! But I see that&rsquo;s a delicate matter and
  I am an ass; forgive me. But, talking of foolishness, do you know
  Praskovya Pavlovna is not nearly so foolish as you would think at first
  sight?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No,&rdquo; mumbled Raskolnikov, looking away, but feeling that it was better to
  keep up the conversation.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;She isn&rsquo;t, is she?&rdquo; cried Razumihin, delighted to get an answer out of
  him. &ldquo;But she is not very clever either, eh? She is essentially,
  essentially an unaccountable character! I am sometimes quite at a loss, I
  assure you.... She must be forty; she says she is thirty-six, and of
  course she has every right to say so. But I swear I judge her
  intellectually, simply from the metaphysical point of view; there is a
  sort of symbolism sprung up between us, a sort of algebra or what not! I
  don&rsquo;t understand it! Well, that&rsquo;s all nonsense. Only, seeing that you are
  not a student now and have lost your lessons and your clothes, and that
  through the young lady&rsquo;s death she has no need to treat you as a relation,
  she suddenly took fright; and as you hid in your den and dropped all your
  old relations with her, she planned to get rid of you. And she&rsquo;s been
  cherishing that design a long time, but was sorry to lose the I O U, for
  you assured her yourself that your mother would pay.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It was base of me to say that.... My mother herself is almost a beggar...
  and I told a lie to keep my lodging... and be fed,&rdquo; Raskolnikov said
  loudly and distinctly.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, you did very sensibly. But the worst of it is that at that point Mr.
  Tchebarov turns up, a business man. Pashenka would never have thought of
  doing anything on her own account, she is too retiring; but the business
  man is by no means retiring, and first thing he puts the question, &lsquo;Is
  there any hope of realising the I O U?&rsquo; Answer: there is, because he has a
  mother who would save her Rodya with her hundred and twenty-five roubles
  pension, if she has to starve herself; and a sister, too, who would go
  into bondage for his sake. That&rsquo;s what he was building upon.... Why do you
  start? I know all the ins and outs of your affairs now, my dear boy&mdash;it&rsquo;s
  not for nothing that you were so open with Pashenka when you were her
  prospective son-in-law, and I say all this as a friend.... But I tell you
  what it is; an honest and sensitive man is open; and a business man
  &lsquo;listens and goes on eating&rsquo; you up. Well, then she gave the I O U by way
  of payment to this Tchebarov, and without hesitation he made a formal
  demand for payment. When I heard of all this I wanted to blow him up, too,
  to clear my conscience, but by that time harmony reigned between me and
  Pashenka, and I insisted on stopping the whole affair, engaging that you
  would pay. I went security for you, brother. Do you understand? We called
  Tchebarov, flung him ten roubles and got the I O U back from him, and here
  I have the honour of presenting it to you. She trusts your word now. Here,
  take it, you see I have torn it.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Razumihin put the note on the table. Raskolnikov looked at him and turned
  to the wall without uttering a word. Even Razumihin felt a twinge.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I see, brother,&rdquo; he said a moment later, &ldquo;that I have been playing the
  fool again. I thought I should amuse you with my chatter, and I believe I
  have only made you cross.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Was it you I did not recognise when I was delirious?&rdquo; Raskolnikov asked,
  after a moment&rsquo;s pause without turning his head.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, and you flew into a rage about it, especially when I brought Zametov
  one day.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Zametov? The head clerk? What for?&rdquo; Raskolnikov turned round quickly and
  fixed his eyes on Razumihin.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What&rsquo;s the matter with you?... What are you upset about? He wanted to
  make your acquaintance because I talked to him a lot about you.... How
  could I have found out so much except from him? He is a capital fellow,
  brother, first-rate... in his own way, of course. Now we are friends&mdash;see
  each other almost every day. I have moved into this part, you know. I have
  only just moved. I&rsquo;ve been with him to Luise Ivanovna once or twice.... Do
  you remember Luise, Luise Ivanovna?
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Did I say anything in delirium?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I should think so! You were beside yourself.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What did I rave about?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What next? What did you rave about? What people do rave about.... Well,
  brother, now I must not lose time. To work.&rdquo; He got up from the table and
  took up his cap.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What did I rave about?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How he keeps on! Are you afraid of having let out some secret? Don&rsquo;t
  worry yourself; you said nothing about a countess. But you said a lot
  about a bulldog, and about ear-rings and chains, and about Krestovsky
  Island, and some porter, and Nikodim Fomitch and Ilya Petrovitch, the
  assistant superintendent. And another thing that was of special interest
  to you was your own sock. You whined, &lsquo;Give me my sock.&rsquo; Zametov hunted
  all about your room for your socks, and with his own scented,
  ring-bedecked fingers he gave you the rag. And only then were you
  comforted, and for the next twenty-four hours you held the wretched thing
  in your hand; we could not get it from you. It is most likely somewhere
  under your quilt at this moment. And then you asked so piteously for
  fringe for your trousers. We tried to find out what sort of fringe, but we
  could not make it out. Now to business! Here are thirty-five roubles; I
  take ten of them, and shall give you an account of them in an hour or two.
  I will let Zossimov know at the same time, though he ought to have been
  here long ago, for it is nearly twelve. And you, Nastasya, look in pretty
  often while I am away, to see whether he wants a drink or anything else.
  And I will tell Pashenka what is wanted myself. Good-bye!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;He calls her Pashenka! Ah, he&rsquo;s a deep one!&rdquo; said Nastasya as he went
  out; then she opened the door and stood listening, but could not resist
  running downstairs after him. She was very eager to hear what he would say
  to the landlady. She was evidently quite fascinated by Razumihin.
</p>
<p>
  No sooner had she left the room than the sick man flung off the bedclothes
  and leapt out of bed like a madman. With burning, twitching impatience he
  had waited for them to be gone so that he might set to work. But to what
  work? Now, as though to spite him, it eluded him.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Good God, only tell me one thing: do they know of it yet or not? What if
  they know it and are only pretending, mocking me while I am laid up, and
  then they will come in and tell me that it&rsquo;s been discovered long ago and
  that they have only... What am I to do now? That&rsquo;s what I&rsquo;ve forgotten, as
  though on purpose; forgotten it all at once, I remembered a minute ago.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He stood in the middle of the room and gazed in miserable bewilderment
  about him; he walked to the door, opened it, listened; but that was not
  what he wanted. Suddenly, as though recalling something, he rushed to the
  corner where there was a hole under the paper, began examining it, put his
  hand into the hole, fumbled&mdash;but that was not it. He went to the
  stove, opened it and began rummaging in the ashes; the frayed edges of his
  trousers and the rags cut off his pocket were lying there just as he had
  thrown them. No one had looked, then! Then he remembered the sock about
  which Razumihin had just been telling him. Yes, there it lay on the sofa
  under the quilt, but it was so covered with dust and grime that Zametov
  could not have seen anything on it.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Bah, Zametov! The police office! And why am I sent for to the police
  office? Where&rsquo;s the notice? Bah! I am mixing it up; that was then. I
  looked at my sock then, too, but now... now I have been ill. But what did
  Zametov come for? Why did Razumihin bring him?&rdquo; he muttered, helplessly
  sitting on the sofa again. &ldquo;What does it mean? Am I still in delirium, or
  is it real? I believe it is real.... Ah, I remember; I must escape! Make
  haste to escape. Yes, I must, I must escape! Yes... but where? And where
  are my clothes? I&rsquo;ve no boots. They&rsquo;ve taken them away! They&rsquo;ve hidden
  them! I understand! Ah, here is my coat&mdash;they passed that over! And
  here is money on the table, thank God! And here&rsquo;s the I O U... I&rsquo;ll take
  the money and go and take another lodging. They won&rsquo;t find me!... Yes, but
  the address bureau? They&rsquo;ll find me, Razumihin will find me. Better escape
  altogether... far away... to America, and let them do their worst! And
  take the I O U... it would be of use there.... What else shall I take?
  They think I am ill! They don&rsquo;t know that I can walk, ha-ha-ha! I could
  see by their eyes that they know all about it! If only I could get
  downstairs! And what if they have set a watch there&mdash;policemen!
  What&rsquo;s this tea? Ah, and here is beer left, half a bottle, cold!&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He snatched up the bottle, which still contained a glassful of beer, and
  gulped it down with relish, as though quenching a flame in his breast. But
  in another minute the beer had gone to his head, and a faint and even
  pleasant shiver ran down his spine. He lay down and pulled the quilt over
  him. His sick and incoherent thoughts grew more and more disconnected, and
  soon a light, pleasant drowsiness came upon him. With a sense of comfort
  he nestled his head into the pillow, wrapped more closely about him the
  soft, wadded quilt which had replaced the old, ragged greatcoat, sighed
  softly and sank into a deep, sound, refreshing sleep.
</p>
<p>
  He woke up, hearing someone come in. He opened his eyes and saw Razumihin
  standing in the doorway, uncertain whether to come in or not. Raskolnikov
  sat up quickly on the sofa and gazed at him, as though trying to recall
  something.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Ah, you are not asleep! Here I am! Nastasya, bring in the parcel!&rdquo;
   Razumihin shouted down the stairs. &ldquo;You shall have the account directly.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;What time is it?&rdquo; asked Raskolnikov, looking round uneasily.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Yes, you had a fine sleep, brother, it&rsquo;s almost evening, it will be six
  o&rsquo;clock directly. You have slept more than six hours.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Good heavens! Have I?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;And why not? It will do you good. What&rsquo;s the hurry? A tryst, is it? We&rsquo;ve
  all time before us. I&rsquo;ve been waiting for the last three hours for you;
  I&rsquo;ve been up twice and found you asleep. I&rsquo;ve called on Zossimov twice;
  not at home, only fancy! But no matter, he will turn up. And I&rsquo;ve been out
  on my own business, too. You know I&rsquo;ve been moving to-day, moving with my
  uncle. I have an uncle living with me now. But that&rsquo;s no matter, to
  business. Give me the parcel, Nastasya. We will open it directly. And how
  do you feel now, brother?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I am quite well, I am not ill. Razumihin, have you been here long?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I tell you I&rsquo;ve been waiting for the last three hours.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;No, before.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How do you mean?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;How long have you been coming here?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Why I told you all about it this morning. Don&rsquo;t you remember?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  Raskolnikov pondered. The morning seemed like a dream to him. He could not
  remember alone, and looked inquiringly at Razumihin.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Hm!&rdquo; said the latter, &ldquo;he has forgotten. I fancied then that you were not
  quite yourself. Now you are better for your sleep.... You really look much
  better. First-rate! Well, to business. Look here, my dear boy.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  He began untying the bundle, which evidently interested him.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Believe me, brother, this is something specially near my heart. For we
  must make a man of you. Let&rsquo;s begin from the top. Do you see this cap?&rdquo; he
  said, taking out of the bundle a fairly good though cheap and ordinary
  cap. &ldquo;Let me try it on.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Presently, afterwards,&rdquo; said Raskolnikov, waving it off pettishly.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Come, Rodya, my boy, don&rsquo;t oppose it, afterwards will be too late; and I
  shan&rsquo;t sleep all night, for I bought it by guess, without measure. Just
  right!&rdquo; he cried triumphantly, fitting it on, &ldquo;just your size! A proper
  head-covering is the first thing in dress and a recommendation in its own
  way. Tolstyakov, a friend of mine, is always obliged to take off his
  pudding basin when he goes into any public place where other people wear
  their hats or caps. People think he does it from slavish politeness, but
  it&rsquo;s simply because he is ashamed of his bird&rsquo;s nest; he is such a
  boastful fellow! Look, Nastasya, here are two specimens of headgear: this
  Palmerston&rdquo;&mdash;he took from the corner Raskolnikov&rsquo;s old, battered hat,
  which for some unknown reason, he called a Palmerston&mdash;&ldquo;or this
  jewel! Guess the price, Rodya, what do you suppose I paid for it,
  Nastasya!&rdquo; he said, turning to her, seeing that Raskolnikov did not speak.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Twenty copecks, no more, I dare say,&rdquo; answered Nastasya.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Twenty copecks, silly!&rdquo; he cried, offended. &ldquo;Why, nowadays you would cost
  more than that&mdash;eighty copecks! And that only because it has been
  worn. And it&rsquo;s bought on condition that when&rsquo;s it&rsquo;s worn out, they will
  give you another next year. Yes, on my word! Well, now let us pass to the
  United States of America, as they called them at school. I assure you I am
  proud of these breeches,&rdquo; and he exhibited to Raskolnikov a pair of light,
  summer trousers of grey woollen material. &ldquo;No holes, no spots, and quite
  respectable, although a little worn; and a waistcoat to match, quite in
  the fashion. And its being worn really is an improvement, it&rsquo;s softer,
  smoother.... You see, Rodya, to my thinking, the great thing for getting
  on in the world is always to keep to the seasons; if you don&rsquo;t insist on
  having asparagus in January, you keep your money in your purse; and it&rsquo;s
  the same with this purchase. It&rsquo;s summer now, so I&rsquo;ve been buying summer
  things&mdash;warmer materials will be wanted for autumn, so you will have
  to throw these away in any case... especially as they will be done for by
  then from their own lack of coherence if not your higher standard of
  luxury. Come, price them! What do you say? Two roubles twenty-five
  copecks! And remember the condition: if you wear these out, you will have
  another suit for nothing! They only do business on that system at
  Fedyaev&rsquo;s; if you&rsquo;ve bought a thing once, you are satisfied for life, for
  you will never go there again of your own free will. Now for the boots.
  What do you say? You see that they are a bit worn, but they&rsquo;ll last a
  couple of months, for it&rsquo;s foreign work and foreign leather; the secretary
  of the English Embassy sold them last week&mdash;he had only worn them six
  days, but he was very short of cash. Price&mdash;a rouble and a half. A
  bargain?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;But perhaps they won&rsquo;t fit,&rdquo; observed Nastasya.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Not fit? Just look!&rdquo; and he pulled out of his pocket Raskolnikov&rsquo;s old,
  broken boot, stiffly coated with dry mud. &ldquo;I did not go empty-handed&mdash;they
  took the size from this monster. We all did our best. And as to your
  linen, your landlady has seen to that. Here, to begin with are three
  shirts, hempen but with a fashionable front.... Well now then, eighty
  copecks the cap, two roubles twenty-five copecks the suit&mdash;together
  three roubles five copecks&mdash;a rouble and a half for the boots&mdash;for,
  you see, they are very good&mdash;and that makes four roubles fifty-five
  copecks; five roubles for the underclothes&mdash;they were bought in the
  lo&mdash;which makes exactly nine roubles fifty-five copecks. Forty-five
  copecks change in coppers. Will you take it? And so, Rodya, you are set up
  with a complete new rig-out, for your overcoat will serve, and even has a
  style of its own. That comes from getting one&rsquo;s clothes from Sharmer&rsquo;s! As
  for your socks and other things, I leave them to you; we&rsquo;ve twenty-five
  roubles left. And as for Pashenka and paying for your lodging, don&rsquo;t you
  worry. I tell you she&rsquo;ll trust you for anything. And now, brother, let me
  change your linen, for I daresay you will throw off your illness with your
  shirt.&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Let me be! I don&rsquo;t want to!&rdquo; Raskolnikov waved him off. He had listened
  with disgust to Razumihin&rsquo;s efforts to be playful about his purchases.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Come, brother, don&rsquo;t tell me I&rsquo;ve been trudging around for nothing,&rdquo;
   Razumihin insisted. &ldquo;Nastasya, don&rsquo;t be bashful, but help me&mdash;that&rsquo;s
  it,&rdquo; and in spite of Raskolnikov&rsquo;s resistance he changed his linen. The
  latter sank back on the pillows and for a minute or two said nothing.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;It will be long before I get rid of them,&rdquo; he thought. &ldquo;What money was
  all that bought with?&rdquo; he asked at last, gazing at the wall.
</p>
<p>
  &ldquo;Money? Why, your own, what the messenger brought from Vahrushin, your
  mother sent it. Have you forgotten that, too?&rdquo;
 </p>
<p>
  &ldquo;I remember now,&rdquo; said Raskolnikov after a long, sullen silence. Razumihin
  looked at him, frowning and uneasy.
</p>
<p>
  The door opened and a tall, stout man whose appearance seemed familiar to
  Raskolnikov came in.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2HCH0011" id="link2HCH0011">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
</section></body></html>
